---
title: Learning Python
author: Sean Warlick
date: '2016-08-21'
categories:
  - Python
--- 

In the world of 'Data Science' there has been a simmering debate over
the advantages of R and Python. Ultimately, this debate is futile. Each
language has the tools needed to produce high quality data analysis.
Hoping to expand and complement my existing tool kit I've spent the last
couple of months learning Python.

The bulk of my learning has been through Coursera's *Python For
Everybody Specialization*. Developed by Dr. Charles Severance at the
University of Michigan, the material is presented with dynamic and
detailed lectures. It's also accompanied by a text book *Python For
Informatics*. Broken into four parts, the course sequence is heavily
focused on text manipulation.

The first two parts of the sequence cover general programming topics. It
teaches the basics of loops, conditional statements, and custom
functions. Python's basic data structures are also covered. Anyone with
a programming background should be able to rapidly move through the
material in these lessons quickly.

The third course in the sequence, "Accessing Web Data", is where I
really started learning new things. Before diving into the meat of
material, the course takes a very useful diversion in the Regular
Expressions. The course spends the rest of the time teaching the
students how to work with HTML, XML and JSON file structures. In my
opinion, Python excels at working with web data. Built-in tools allow
programmers or analysts to quickly access data and manipulate all three
formats.

The final course in the sequence is about utilizing databases with
Python programs. For the course, SQLlite is utilized and
[sqllitebrowser](http://sqlitebrowser.org) is utlizied to teach the
basics. The course starts with an elementray introduction to database
architecture and the basics of SQL. For programmers with experience
using relational databases, the SQL introduction can be blown through
very quickly. The more important part of the course is the incorporation
of the SQL in a Python script. The homework assignements require
students to utilize the techniques learned earlier to access and parse
data from the web. The extracted data is then stored in a database.

After the four courses in *Python For Everybody*, I came away with the
foundation needed to start using Python for data analysis. Since then,
I've continued my learning by working through [Python for Data
Analysis](http://www.cin.ufpe.br/~embat/Python%20for%20Data%20Analysis.pdf).
I've also been working on a project which has me building functions in
Python to access and parse real estate data. Hopefully, I'll turn that
into a blog post in the near future.
